Hi, and
welcome to the class on Probability,
as part of the Statistical Inference class
in the Coursera Data Science series.
My name is Brian Caffo, and
this class is co-taught with my
co-instructors, Jeff Leek and Roger Peng.
We're all in the Department of
Biostatistics at the Bloomberg School of
Public Health.
In this lecture, I'm going to cover
probability at a very basic level,
just enough for what we need in
the data science specialization.
I have a more in-depth treatment in
my mathematical biostatistics boot
camp series.
You can watch them on a YouTube playlist
anytime you'd like, and then the course is
offered about every two months on
Coursera, and I give the link here.
In addition,
the course notes are on GitHub.
Let's talk about probability.
So, given a random experiment,
say for example, rolling a die,
a probability measures the population
quantity that summarizes the randomness.
I want to emphasize this
word population here.
What this means in the die roll context,
is that we think of it as
an intrinsic property of the die,
not of something that is a function of
a simple set of fixed rolls of the die.
So, when we talk about probability,
we're not talking about something
that is in the data that we have, but
as a conceptual thing that exists in the
population that we would like to estimate.
So, let's be specific about the rules
that probability has to follow,
so-called probability calculus.
First of all, probability operates on
the potential outcomes from an experiment.
For example, when you roll a die,
you could get a 1, or
you could say, the roll was in the set 1
or 2, or the roll was an even number, 2,
4, 6, or the roll was an odd number,
1, 3, 5, and so on.
So, the probability is a function
that takes any of these sets of
possible outcomes and
assigns it a number between 0 and 1.
You have to have the rule that
the probability that something occurs,
in other words, that you roll the die,
and you get a number, must be one.
And, then the probability of the union
of any two sets of outcomes that
have nothing in common must be the sum
of their respective probabilities.
So, for example, take for
example, when I roll the die, one possible
outcome is that I get a one or a two.
Another possible outcome is
that I get a three or a four.
Those two sets, one and
two, and the other set, three and
four, are mutually exclusive.
They can not both simultaneously occur.
The probability of the union,
that I get a 1, a 2, a 3, or a 4,
is the sum of the two probabilities, the
sum of the probability that I get a 1 or
a 2, plus the sum of the probability
that I get a 3 or a 4.
It turns out that these simple rules are
all that are necessary to generalize to
all the rules that we think
that probability should follow.
And, this was discovered by
the Russian mathematician Kolmogorov.
Here are some of the rules
that probability must follow.
Some of them I stated already, and
some of them are consequences
of what I stated already.
The first is the probability
that nothing occurs as zero, so
you have to roll the die.
Something has to occur,
you have to get a number.
And, that's similarly related to
the probability that something occurs,
that you do get a number is a one.
Something that we intuitively seem to th,
to know,
is the probability of something is 1 minus
the probability that the opposite occurs.
So, the probability of getting an even
number when I roll the die is 1 minus
the probability of getting an odd number.
Because, the odd numbers are the opposite
of getting an even number in
the context of a die.
The probability of at least one of two or
more things that cannot simultaneously
occur, we call sets of things that cannot
simultaneously occur mutually exclusive,
is the sum of their
respective probabilities.
This was part of the basic definition
that we outlined in the previous slide.
Another consequence of
our probability calculus,
if the event A implies
the occurrence of the event B,
then the probability of A occurring is
less than the probability that B occurs.
And, this is kind of
a tongue twister to say, and
it seems a little bit conceptually hard.
However, if we draw a Venn diagram,
it becomes very simple.
The event A lives inside of the event B.
So, when we talk about
the probability of A,
we talk about a number
assigned to this circle A.
When we talk about B,
we talk about the probability assigned to
this circle that includes the area of A,
so
it would make sense that the probability
of B was larger than the probability of A.
So, I think we intuit this very easily.
For example, the probability
that we get a 1, the set A,
is less than the probability that
we get a 1 or a 2, the set B.
Then this final bullet
point is very useful.
For any two events, the probability
that at least one occurs is the sum of
their probabilities minus
their intersection.
Again, this becomes very easy to
visualize with a Venn diagram.
Here we have the set A,
and we have the set B.
If we add their two probabilities,
you see that we've added
the intersection in twice.
Once when we added in A, and
once when we added in B.
Since we've added it in twice,
if we want the probability of the union,
we need to subtract it out once.
The result of this rule is to say that
you can't just add probabilities if
they have a non trivial interact,
in intersection.
And, we'll give an example
of that in a second.
The National Sleep Foundation reports that
around 3% of the American population has
sleep afne, apnea.
They also report around 10%
of the North American and
European population has
restless leg syndrome.
Let's assume, for
the sake of argument, that these are
probabilities from the same population.
Can we just simply add these
probabilities, and conclude that about 13%
of people have at least one sleep problem
of these sorts in this population?
So, the answer is no,
the events can simultaneously occur, and
so are not mutually exclusive.
We think that there is a non-trivial
component of the population that
has both sleep apnea and
restless leg syndrome.
So, to elaborate, let's let A be the event
that a person drawn from this population
has sleep apnea, and B be the event
that they have restless leg syndrome.
Here, we think this intersection is
non-trivial, and so if we were to
add the two probabilities, we would
believe we will have added it in twice and
it would need to get subtracted out
to find the probability of the union.